---
inFeed: true
hasPage: true
inNav: false
inLanguage: null
starred: false
keywords: []
description: ''
datePublished: '2016-01-17T21:25:51.991Z'
dateModified: '2016-01-17T21:25:41.185Z'
title: ''
author: []
authors: []
publisher:
  name: null
  domain: null
  url: null
  favicon: null
sourcePath: _posts/2016-01-17-5b915a90-0872-4bd7-933f-bcbb14043a6b.md
published: true
url: 5b915a90-0872-4bd7-933f-bcbb14043a6b/index.html
_type: Article

---
It's Friday evening in August, and you know what this means: Fringe Season in Edmonton. Whyte Ave. traffic is backed up as usual, crowds of people roaming the streets. My iPhone, connected to the speakers, changes songs and I hear Regina gently sing... _summer in the city means cleavage, cleavage, cleavage, and I start to miss you baby, sometimes..._I check the rear-view mirror -- I'm dolled up and ready for work, with an inauthentic but inviting demeanor and a well-rehearsed smile that makes customers feel warm, welcome, and well-attended to; a smile that invites customers to tip generously. With a passive foot on the pedal, I inch forward towards the intersection. Regina continues... _I've been staying up drinking in late-night establishments, telling strangers personal things... _My attention hones in, my heart sinks... _summer in the city, I'm so lonely, lonely, lonely... _and I realize I relate to every line she breathes. I begin to weep, at first cautiously, before losing complete control, as I come face to face with my own deep sense of longing and isolation. The very feeling I've been avoiding, denying, suppressing, has been boldly put into words.

INTRODUCTION

Upon passive listening, Regina Spector's _Summer in the City _may feel like a simple love song. But Regina's lyrics are clever and intentional as she narrates a poignant, desire-drenched story that evokes an aesthetic reaction in the active listener. Her text is rich with signification as she points to themes of sexual arousal and the suppression thereof; moreover, her lyrics elicit an undeniable sense of loneliness and isolation. This analysis focuses on the latter theme, the manifestation of _anomie, _the sense of loneliness and isolation that is developed as consequence to living in an urbanized area (or more specifically, "the city").

DON'T TALK TO STRANGERS: ANOMIE IN THE CITY

There is little doubt that the word _city _comes packed with signification. Depending on one's background, this term may signify crowds, bustling traffic, vitality, individuality, economic growth and cultural diversity (Barker 2012, 393-424). However, individuals living in urban spaces are also subjected to "passing encounters leading to superficial, transitory, competitive relationships from which would grow a sense of alienation and powerlessness" (Barker 2012, 401). These passing encounters lead to a psychological social condition called _anomie._

Termed by French sociologist Émile Durkheim, the term _anomie_refers to feelings of indifference, social disconnection (Wirth 1938, 12), rootlessness and futility, and these feelings are manifested as a consequence of living amongst a dense urban population (Wirth 1938, 12). In _Summer in the City, _Regina wastes no words before drowning the listener in this sense of isolation. Regina's lyrics narrate her many attempts to interacts with strangers. The use of the word "stranger" signifies to the reader a sense of social distance, unfamiliarity, and a definite lack of personal intimacy. Further, this word signifies danger, based on the motto so fervently built from childhood into western culture's moral code: don't talk to strangers. Regina does the opposite, making multiple attempts to connect with these strangers. She sings of "staying up, drinkin' in late-night establishments / telling strangers personal things"; however, this first attempt does not abate her cry of being "lonely, lonely, lonely," so she goes "to a protest just to rub up against strangers." The word "protest," signifying anarchy, chaos, disagreement and unruliness, highlights her fierce desire for physical intimacy as a means to fight off this feeling of _anomie._

In her final attempt to connect with strangers, "they turn around smilin' / but there's no recognition in their eyes." While eyes provide a physical ability to see the world, they also signify communication, depth, invitation, connection, clarity, vision, and intimacy. The lack of recognition is symbolic of a deep sense of loneliness and disconnection that Regina cannot shake, despite being in close proximity with other human beings in the city.

CONCLUSION

In _Urbanism as a Way of Life, Louis Wirth theorizes that as a citizen in an urban population, one develops a way to cope with a consuming sense of alienation:_

The contacts of the city may indeed be face to face, but they are nevertheless impersonal, superficial, transitory, and segmental.

The reserve, the indifference, and the blasé outlook which urbanites manifest in their relationships may thus be regarded as devices for immunizing themselves against the personal claims and expectations of others. ( 1938, 12) _With this in mind, Summer in the City _can be interpreted as a narrative of a young woman who is being tormented by an absence of intimacy and personal contact. She tries and fails to resist this inevitable spiral into disconnection, loneliness, and the impending sense of _anomie._

Summer in the City Lyrics

Summer in the city means cleavage, cleavage, cleavage

I've been staying up and drinking in late-night establishments

Telling strangers personal things

Summer in the city, I'm so lonely, lonely, lonely

So I went to a protest just to rub up against strangers

And I did feel like comin', but I also felt like cryin' and it

Doesn't seem so worth it right now

And the castrated ones stand in the corner, smoking

They want to feel the bulges in their pants start to ride

At the sight of a beautiful woman, they feel nothin' but but

Anger, her skin makes them sick in the night

Nauseous, nauseous, nauseous

Summer in the city, I'm so lonely, lonely, lonely

I've been hallucinatin' you, babe, at the backs of other women

And I tap 'em on the shoulder, and they turn around smilin' but

There's no recognition in their eyes

Oh, summer in the city

Means cleavage, cleavage, cleavage

And don't get me wrong dear, in, in general I think I'm doin' quite fine

It's just when it's summer in the city and you're long gone from the city

I start to miss you, baby, sometimes

When it's summer in the city, and you're so long gone from the city,

I start to miss you, baby, sometimes, oooo I

Start to miss you, baby, sometimes, ooo I

Start to miss ya, baby, sometimes.

Bibliography

AZLyrics. 2014\. "Summer in the City." Accessed September 26, 2014\. http://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/reginaspektor/summerinthecity.html

Barker, Chris. 2012\. "Cultural Space and Urban Place." In _Cultural Studies: Theory and Practice, 393-424\. Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE Publications._

Spektor, Regina. "Summer in the City." In _Begin to Hope. _New York: Sire, 2006\. CD.

Wirth, Louis. 1938\. "Urbanism as a Way of Life." _American Journal of Sociology. Vol. 44, No. 1: pp. 1-24\. Accessed September 26, 2014\. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2768119_